[rl] Search-R1: multi-turn retrieval-augmented GRPO (#3602)
pytorch/torchtitan: torchtitan/experiments/rl/examples/search_r1/README.md

# Search-R1: multi-turn retrieval-augmented GRPO

A [Search-R1](https://github.com/PeterGriffinJin/Search-R1) example in torchtitan's
RL experiment. The model is given a `search` tool; it thinks natively
(`enable_thinking=True`), calls `search` (a standard tool call) when it needs facts,
gets the retrieved passages back as a `tool` message, and replies with a final answer.
Reward is exact-match (EM) against gold answers (optionally plus a retrieval bonus).

It is a multi-turn, tool-using RL example: each assistant turn ends at the renderer's

> role boundary, the env answers a `search` tool call with a `tool`-role message, and the

Reviewer: not sure what you
```suggestion
It is a multi-turn, tool-using RL example: The assistant takes a prompt and produces a response, the env answers a `search` tool call with a `tool`-role message, and the
```

rollout continues until the model stops calling tools or the turn budget is hit. It
runs entirely on the framework's multi-turn rollouter (`rollout/rollouter.py`) and
continuous-batching generator — the only example-specific pieces are this folder plus
its config.

## Files
- `data.py` — `SearchR1Dataset` / `SearchR1Sample`: reads the NQ/HotpotQA parquet.
- `env.py` — `SearchR1Env(MessageEnv)`: defines the `search` `ToolSpec`, reads the
  renderer-parsed `tool_calls`, runs retrieval, and returns the passages as a `tool`
  message. The per-rollout turn budget is enforced by `TokenEnv.max_num_turns`.
- `rubric.py` — `RewardExactMatch`. **Default = pure-EM 0/1** on the final answer
  (correct → 1.0, else 0). Set `retrieval_score` > 0 to give partial credit when a
  search surfaced the gold answer (puts search on the gradient, anti closed-book).
- `rollouter.py` — wires datasets + env + rubric into a `Rollouter.Config`.

## Prerequisites

Install the example's extra Python dependencies (not in core torchtitan):

```bash
pip install -r torchtitan/experiments/rl/examples/search_r1/requirements.txt
```

### 1. Data
Prepare the Search-R1 NQ/HotpotQA parquet (via Search-R1's

> `scripts/data_process/qa_search_{train,test}_merge.py`). Point the config's

Reviewer: where is this? And do we need a script? isnt this already ready to be used in HF?

Author: yeah, change to HF native

`train_dataset`/`validation_dataset` `data_path` at it, or set the
`SEARCH_R1_TRAIN_PARQUET` / `SEARCH_R1_TEST_PARQUET` env vars (used by `rollouter.py`).

### 2. Local dense retrieval server
Start the dense retriever (e5 index over wiki-18) listening on

> `http://127.0.0.1:8000/retrieve` **before** training, pinned to spare GPU(s) so it does

Reviewer: should gpus be explicitly defined somehow? i havent checked this code yet

Author: I guess this should be user's option, I think they can find a spare GPU somewhere?

  slime's pure-EM 0/1** (correct answer → 1.0, else 0). Opt into the fine-grained
  graded reward by setting the sub-scores > 0
  (`structure_format_score=0.2, retrieval_score=0.1, final_format_score=0.1`): it adds
  a `<think>→<search>→<information>→<answer>` format state-machine + retrieval-correctness
  credit, so a bare correct answer (0.8) scores less than a searched one (1.0) and the
  policy can't reward-hack by skipping search. `RewardAnswerEM` is a metric-only (weight 0)
  pure-EM signal.
- `rollouter.py` — wires datasets + env + rubric; `token_env.max_num_turns` bounds turns.

## Prerequisites

### 1. Data
Prepare the Search-R1 NQ/HotpotQA parquet (via Search-R1's
`scripts/data_process/qa_search_{train,test}_merge.py`). The default paths are in
`rollouter.py` (`DEFAULT_TRAIN_PARQUET` / `DEFAULT_TEST_PARQUET`); override
`train_dataset`/`validation_dataset` `data_path` to point elsewhere.

### 2. Local dense retrieval server
Start the Search-R1 / slime dense retriever (e5 index over wiki-18) listening on
`http://127.0.0.1:8000/retrieve` **before** training. Pin it to a spare GPU so it
doesn't clash with the RL GPUs, e.g.:

```bash

> source /home/yichuan/retriever-venv/bin/activate

Reviewer 2: seems personal directory

config's `data_path` to a parquet with `question` / `golden_answers` columns.

### 2. Local dense retrieval server
Start the dense retriever (e5 index over wiki-18) listening on
`http://127.0.0.1:8000/retrieve` **before** training, pinned to spare GPU(s) so it does
not clash with the RL GPUs:

```bash
python <search-r1>/local_dense_retriever/retrieval_server.py \
  --index_path $INDEX_PATH/e5_Flat.index \
  --corpus_path $CORPUS_PATH/wiki-18.jsonl \
  --topk 3 --retriever_name e5 --retriever_model intfloat/e5-base-v2 --faiss_gpu
```

Override `message_env.search_url` / `message_env.topk` in the config if needed.

## Run

```bash
# example run (Qwen3-1.7B), W&B on
python torchtitan/experiments/rl/train.py \
  --module torchtitan.experiments.rl.examples.search_r1 \
  --config rl_grpo_qwen3_1_7b_search_r1
```

Watch `validation_reward/_mean` (NQ test EM) trend up.

## Results

Validation exact-match (held-out NQ test split, greedy decoding) climbs steadily as the
policy learns to call `search` and answer concisely.

**Qwen3-1.7B** — EM ~0.05 → ~0.40 (peak ~0.41):

![Qwen3-1.7B validation EM](./assets/validation_em_1.7b.png)

**Qwen3-8B** — EM ~0.26 → ~0.45 (peak ~0.45):

> ![Qwen3-8B validation EM](./assets/validation_em_8b.png)

Reviewer 2: Also, as we updated the actual recipe, these pictures would go outdated.
- One option is to include the pictures only in PR summary, not landing.
- If you think it's helpful to land them, please add timestamp / commit hash around, so people can reproduce.

# Search-R1: multi-turn retrieval-augmented GRPO

A [Search-R1](https://github.com/PeterGriffinJin/Search-R1) example in torchtitan's
RL experiment. The model is given a `search` tool; it calls `search` (a standard tool
call) when it needs facts, gets the retrieved passages back as a `tool` message, and

> replies with a final answer. Reward is exact-match (EM) against gold answers (optionally

Reviewer 3: again, gold or golden answers? be consistent.

chain-of-thought doesn't help EM and would eat into the multi-turn token budget. Flip it to
`True` in the config for tasks that benefit from reasoning.

It is a multi-turn, tool-using RL example: the assistant takes a prompt and produces a
response, the env answers a `search` tool call with a `tool`-role message, and the
rollout continues until the model stops calling tools or the turn budget is hit. It
runs entirely on the framework's multi-turn rollouter (`rollout/rollouter.py`) and
continuous-batching generator — the only example-specific pieces are this folder plus
its config.

## Files
- `data.py` — `SearchR1Dataset` / `SearchR1Sample`: streams the NQ/HotpotQA parquet,
  downloaded from the HF dataset `PeterJinGo/nq_hotpotqa_train` (no preprocessing).
- `env.py` — `SearchR1Env(MessageEnv)`: defines the `search` `ToolSpec`, reads the
  renderer-parsed `tool_calls`, runs retrieval, and returns the passages as a `tool`
  message. The per-rollout turn budget is enforced by `TokenEnv.max_num_turns`.
- `rubric.py` — `RewardExactMatch`. **Default = pure-EM 0/1** on the final answer
  (correct → 1.0, else 0). Set `retrieval_score` > 0 to give partial credit when a

>   search surfaced the gold answer (puts search on the gradient, anti closed-book).

Reviewer 3: please also mention `no_search_penalty` to make this statement complete. the overall goal is to give partial scores for partial answers and avoid reward hacking from answering without search iiuc.

- `rollouter.py` — wires datasets + env + rubric into a `Rollouter.Config`.

## Prerequisites

> Install the example's extra Python dependencies (not in core torchtitan):

Reviewer 3: Install the example's extra Python dependencies (in addition to core torchtitan and torchtitan rl.

```bash
pip install -r torchtitan/experiments/rl/examples/search_r1/requirements.txt
```

### 1. Data
Nothing to prepare — the NQ/HotpotQA parquet is pulled straight from the HF dataset
[`PeterJinGo/nq_hotpotqa_train`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/PeterJinGo/nq_hotpotqa_train)
on first use (train + NQ-test splits). To use a local copy instead, set the dataset
config's `data_path` to a parquet with `question` / `golden_answers` columns.

### 2. Local dense retrieval server
Start the dense retriever (e5 index over wiki-18) listening on
`http://127.0.0.1:8000/retrieve` **before** training, pinned to spare GPU(s) so it does
not clash with the RL GPUs:

```bash
python <search-r1>/local_dense_retriever/retrieval_server.py \
  --index_path $INDEX_PATH/e5_Flat.index \
  --corpus_path $CORPUS_PATH/wiki-18.jsonl \
  --topk 3 --retriever_name e5 --retriever_model intfloat/e5-base-v2 --faiss_gpu
```

Override `message_env.search_url` / `message_env.topk` in the config if needed.

## Run

```bash

> # eval run (Qwen3-1.7B), W&B on

Reviewer 3: eval run is misleading, this is a full training run. maybe use `example run`.
